1|Owls, barn owls, toads and witches.
2|Almost every Galician has heard this spell at some point at a queimada (a bowl of burning spirits), and it seems to take you back many centuries.
3|But it has a known author, and it dates from nineteen sixty-seven.
4|Mariano Marcos Abalo wrote it, in Vigo, on an old boat moored in the harbour.
5|Vilalba, sixteen seventeen.
6|According to a witness, the midwife Dorotea do Barro had said that she could pass a woman's labour pains on to a man.
7|=6
8|It was enough to put the woman's shoes on the man while saying a few words.
9|And the man would leap like a wild colt. Good night.
10|The voice you are about to hear is synthetic, and this text was prepared by an automatic process.
11|This is Galician Things to Fall Asleep To.
12|And there is a reason why many people thought the spell was a popular, anonymous text.
13|That testimony from Vilalba is kept in the Archive of the Kingdom of Galicia, in a witchcraft trial of the Royal Court.
14|And there is more there: a neighbour woman who stayed awake one night. And a cat that nobody managed to catch.
15|In more than a century of trials, according to the same Archive, the Inquisition of Santiago sent only one woman accused of witchcraft to the stake.
16|For the researcher Diego Valor Bravo, the dreaded Inquisition was lenient with the witches, and the judges of the ordinary courts were much harsher.
17|=16
18|Four hundred years ago, the witch was often not the witch of fairy tales.
19|She was the one who healed, who helped women give birth, who knew about herbs. And there is a list.
20|One Saint John's night, in Campo Lameiro, some neighbours went to spy on the fountain and wrote down in a list the women they saw there.
21|A witness told why they made it, and we will come back to that fountain.
22|Tonight we are going to meet the real witches: those in the trial papers, those by the hearth and those at the fountains.
23|Dorotea and María do Barro, mother and daughter, were from San Xiao de Mourence, in Vilalba.
24|The daughter was also accused of being a procuress: they said she took married men and single women into her house.
25|According to a witness, when María do Barro had her cattle on the hillside she would say some words, some in a low voice and others that could be heard.
26|Among those words, she said that her cattle should drink water from seven springs and bring milk from seven byres and seven hills.
27|On the paper even the correction was written down: that it should bring water, I mean, milk.
28|The vicar general of the diocese of Mondoñedo excommunicated the accused women and ordered that nobody give them bread, salt, water or fire.
29|In Xinzo de Limia, in sixteen twelve, the court of the Count of Monterrei opened a trial against Ana González, who was reputed to be a witch.
30|According to a witness, a neighbour, María Feijoa, stayed awake one night to see who was doing her harm.
31|And she saw, she said, Ana González in the shape of a cat, jumping from one side to the other. Nobody managed to catch it: it escaped through a hole in the door.
32|=31
33|Another neighbour, the wife of Rodrigo Colmenero, said that one day she was at her door winding yarn when Ana González arrived.
34|She came to tell her that her husband, Rodrigo, was going around calling her a witch.
35|And she said that, as Ana González went out through the gate of the farmyard, she turned to look at her, and at that moment her earring broke into three pieces.
36|She was quite certain it had happened because of Ana González's evil eye.
37|In sixteen eleven, in the parish of Palio, in Lalín, the Royal Court put on trial Marta de Quián, who was reputed to be a witch and sorceress.
38|According to the trial, a neighbour complained that the milk of her cows was being spilled.
39|And Marta told her that she would make a remedy so that the witches would not spill it or take it away.
40|Another witness declared that Marta had told her that, for four or five reales, she would make a young woman stop looking at a man.
41|For that she asked for earth from the footprint he left when he stepped, and hairs of the young woman, the ones left in her comb.
42|Back then they believed that witches turned into cats, toads or wolves. They said that while the witch flew to the gatherings, a fake body stayed asleep in her bed.
43|=42
44|It was believed that with potions, ointments and objects such as earth or hair they could spoil the milk, kill the cows and ruin the harvests.
45|And it was accepted that some witches were good, able to protect and to heal.
46|But, according to Rodrigo Pousa, historian, flying on a broomstick was not part of the beliefs of Galician women at that time.
47|And now, the spell from the boat, which Mariano Marcos Abalo wrote in Vigo in nineteen sixty-seven.
48|As he himself told, he wanted to give a bit of ritual to the queimadas (bowls of burning spirits) he made with his friends in the sixties.
49|They gathered on board an old confiscated boat, moored in the harbour, and there they made the queimadas.
50|And he said there were five or six other spells from that time, but none was as successful as his. The reason we mentioned at the beginning is simple.
51|A company sold copies of the spell without the author's name, and that is why many people thought it was a popular, anonymous text.
52|In two thousand one, Mariano Marcos Abalo registered the spell as intellectual property. The queimada itself is not as old as it seems either.
53|It is popularly given Celtic origins, but that is impossible, because the still arrived in Galicia in the Middle Ages. Professor Carlos Alonso del Real wrote so in nineteen seventy-two.
54|=53
55|And the historian Xavier Castro calls it an invented tradition.
56|According to the anthropologist González Reboredo, the custom of drinking queimada at parties arose around the nineteen fifties, among Galicians who lived abroad.
57|At gatherings like these, the custom of accompanying it with spells written for the occasion was probably born.
58|In nineteen fifty-five, the potter Tito Freire created the clay bowl with legs in which the queimada is usually made today.
59|And in Eligio's tavern, in Vigo, writers and artists such as Cunqueiro and Castroviejo built up the ritual around the pot.
60|Castroviejo said that adding coffee beans to the queimada was a horrible modern heresy. So, among friends, boats and taverns, a ritual that seems ancient was born in a few decades.
61|In Santiago, where the Hotel Compostela stands today, was the last seat of the Inquisition, the Casa Grande de Calo, demolished in nineteen thirteen.
62|But witchcraft was a crime of mixed jurisdiction: it could be judged by the civil courts, the church courts and the Inquisition.
63|Between fifteen seventy-four and seventeen hundred, the Inquisition tried ninety-two women and forty-eight men for witchcraft.
64|They are terrible figures, says the Archive of the Kingdom, but very low compared with those of other Inquisition tribunals. The witch craze reached Galicia, but, according to Pousa, without the hysteria of other parts of Europe.
65|=64
66|The Archive also keeps some thirty witchcraft trials of the royal courts, which in twenty twenty had still not been studied.
67|In them, all the accused were women, and some ended in sentences of exile, of flogging or of being paraded covered in feathers to public shame.
68|In sixteen thirty-nine, the Royal Court put on trial María Cibreira and other women from Pazos de Arenteiro, in Boborás.
69|After being tortured, María Cibreira confessed that for some twelve years she had practised the trade of witch and sorceress. And that her mother, Guiomar Douteiro, had taught it to her.
70|She said that many people came to her mother's house, and that she made cures and remedies for them. She also said that on Saint John's nights and on the first of May the witches went to the devil's gatherings, on the sands of Seville.
71|=70
72|Pousa explains that those women did not know what to declare: the answers were already in the questions. As late as eighteen twenty-six, in Santiago de Compostela, the Royal Court sentenced the fortune-teller Benita Montero.
73|=72
74|In her house they had found an old deck of cards, a rosary and a scapular with a jet fig-hand amulet. Her sentence was to leave prison covered in feathers and riding a mule, on a market day, with the deck of cards hung around her neck.
75|The Inquisition also tried María Soliña, a neighbour from Cangas, for witchcraft. About her, warns the Council of Galician Culture, we have few personal details.
76|The poet Celso Emilio Ferreiro dedicated a poem to her in the book Long Night of Stone, published in nineteen sixty-two. Today, María Soliña is a symbol of the suffering of the people, and above all of women.
77|And finally, the list of Campo Lameiro.
78|In sixteen forty-three, the Royal Court put on trial Inés de Maquieira and other women of Campo Lameiro. Some neighbours said that one of the accused had made their calves and piglets die, because they had quarrelled with her.
79|=78
80|A witness said that, because of their suspicion of the women, some neighbours had gone to spy on them at the fountain. It was Saint John's night of the previous year, at the fountain of A Nogueira.
81|There they saw and recognised the women, and wrote them down in a list because there were many. On Saint John's night it was the custom to go to the fountains, because the water of that night was believed to have special virtues.
82|And in popular belief, that was also the night when the witches roamed most freely. The same fountain, the same night, and two ways of looking at it.
83|According to the Council of Galician Culture, the healers or witches, above all if they were single or widowed, were the most frequent victims of denunciations. In a village, being single or a widow already marked a woman out as different.
84|Many of the accused were midwives and folk healers who had learned the trade from other women, often from their mothers. In the papers, Pousa found this expression: cursed be the mother who does not teach her daughter to work as a witch.
85|They were necessary, says the same historian, because they solved everyday problems: health, the harvests and the livestock. Many denunciations arose from grudges and quarrels between neighbours.
86|And Pousa says that sometimes there was talk of witchcraft when, in reality, one neighbour's sheep had eaten the other's vineyard. According to him, the witch hunt in the civil courts declined after the first third of the seventeenth century.
87|=86
88|And he thinks that the arrival of maize from America, which eased hunger, helped. In the papers of those trials there are also phrases in Galician, a treasure for the history of the language.
89|In popular thinking there were several kinds of witches, among them sorceresses and fortune-tellers, and the papers contain the expression sorceress witch. And a very well-known saying remains: I don't believe in witches, but they exist, they do.
90|Nobody knows its author: it is a popular saying, also in Spanish, which is attributed a Galician origin. Besides, the phrase does not appear in Cervantes' Don Quixote. And here, slowly, we leave the courts and the witnesses behind.
91|From here the story goes more slowly, and you don't have to remember anything you hear. Let's go into a village kitchen, at nightfall, when the fire has already been lit.
92|The kitchen was the most important and welcoming room of the house: there they received visitors, ate and chatted. Buying and selling deals were also closed there, and from it one passed easily into the animals' stalls.
93|In the hearth the fire burns, on the hearthstone, and above it the smoke hood guides the smoke towards the chimney. There was almost always an oven inside the hearth.
94|Next to the fire is the chestnut-wood settle, a high-backed bench where people sat to eat, to warm up or to pass the time. When the hearthstone was raised, the legs of the settle could rest on it, and so people sat closer to the fire.
95|=94
96|In some houses the settle had a fold-down table, and you had to sit down before lowering it, because afterwards you were trapped in the seat. In the hollow under the seat there could be the coop where they fattened capons.
97|The pot hangs over the fire from an iron chain, the pot-hanger. In cattle-raising areas, the big pots were for the animals' food, and the small ones for the family. And the food is kept in the cupboards in the wall.
98|In these houses people believed in the evil eye, the harm that some people's gaze could do to the health of people or animals. It was believed that it could be cast out of envy, or even unintentionally.
99|The neighbour from Xinzo de Limia, the one with the earring, was quite certain it had been the evil eye. According to Xosé Ramón Mariño Ferro, the belief served to explain misfortunes with no known cause, and also to restrain envy.
100|Because nobody wanted to be accused of casting the evil eye. And there were shepherds and farmers who spat on their cattle when someone praised their animals, just in case, as Vicente Risco recorded.
101|Against the evil eye people carried amulets: a horse chestnut, a clove of garlic, a small horn. On little children they put one of these amulets among their clothes or hung around their neck.
102|Some carried a small bag with a clove of garlic and blessed things, such as holy water, a cross or a scapular. And there was the figa, an amulet shaped like a closed hand, against the evil eye and spells.
103|The spell was something else: an enchantment, the work of a witch. In the sixties, the Danish anthropologist Gustav Henningsen photographed in Galicia the amulets with which cows were protected from the evil eye.
104|Outside, in the night, the hórreo, a granary raised on stone pillars, rests on its feet, which keep it away from the damp and the animals. Its roof could be of tiles, of slate or of rye thatch. The air flows through the openings in the walls, and inside the maize is kept.
105|And on the rat-stones of the hórreo they used to leave pumpkins to dry. There were also cabazos, small granaries of woven branches or wicker, covered with a cone of broom or thatch.
106|Maize does not sprout until the beginning of summer, and it ripens almost in autumn. The hórreo as we know it spread with the cultivation of maize, which arrived in Galicia in the seventeenth century.
107|It is the same maize that, according to Pousa, eased hunger. And somewhere in the house, dry and fragrant, hang last summer's herbs.
108|Saint John's night is the night between the twenty-third and the twenty-fourth of June, close to the summer solstice.
109|It is a night of fire and water, of herbs and dew, and we are going to walk through it slowly, from the evening until dawn. On Saint John's eve the Saint John's herbs are gathered: plants and flowers, many of them medicinal.
110|It is often said that there must be seven different herbs, and the list changes a lot from one place to another. Some people gathered them in the fields a day earlier, to sell them on the eve at the markets of the towns and cities.
111|Among them are fennel, rosemary, broom, fern, mallow, lemon verbena and elder leaves. Fennel has yellow flowers, a pleasant smell and a sweet taste, and it is very abundant in Galicia.
112|Rosemary is an aromatic shrub with small leaves, and it is believed to be the herb that protects and purifies Galician homes. Elder, for its part, has small white flowers.
113|Broom, with yellow flowers, was used to make brooms, and they believed that those brooms swept evil spirits out of the house. And around Saint John's day the foxgloves also bloom, with purple flowers.
114|In the days before, the young people and the neighbours piled up firewood in an open place. At nightfall they lit the bonfires, and people ate grilled sardines, boiled potatoes and maize bread.
115|They drank wine, and sang and danced around the fire. The smoke rose slowly, and in some places they burned green wood, which gives off a lot of smoke, to scare the witches away.
116|When the bonfire was almost out, people jumped over the last flames, always an odd number of times, at least three. And while jumping they said: I jump over the fire of Saint John, so that no bitch or dog will bite me.
117|=116
118|On this night the cattle were also smoked, to protect them from spells. And it was believed that the dew of that night protected the animals, so they took them out of the byres to walk on the wet grass.
119|To make the cacho, they took water from seven springs, as in the words that, according to a witness, María do Barro used to say. They left the herbs in a jar of water, outdoors, so that the night dew would fall on them.
120|They believed that it was the dew that gave the herbs their virtues. With Christianity, people came to say that it was Saint John who blessed them.
121|The legends say that the fern blooms on Saint John's night, right at midnight. And they say that at the fountain of A Moza, in A Veiga, an enchanted maiden appears that night combing her hair.
122|That same legend, of the enchanted maiden who combs her hair at the fountain, is told in many places in Galicia. It was believed that if the young women put certain herbs under their pillow that night, they could see in their dreams the man they would marry.
123|And so, with the scent of the herbs, the night slowly passed towards day. At dawn, the first water of the fountain was called the flower of the water, and they believed it gave health and beauty.
124|The flower of the water was the film on top, the uppermost layer of the water, in which the sun is reflected as it rises. In some places they went to the fountain with a branch of broom, and the first to arrive could gather the flower of the water with it.
125|In As Vendas da Barreira, in Riós, it is believed that the young woman who gathers the flower of the water will marry within the year. And it was believed that at dawn a bird carried in its beak a drop of water and dew, and laid it on a flower.
126|In the morning they washed their faces with the herb water, green and fragrant, facing east in some areas, to receive the first rays of the sun.
127|Some verses say: on Saint John's day, happy girl, go and wash, you will catch the bird's water before the sun rises. Many people believed that the sun dances at dawn on Saint John's day, out of joy for the feast, and they climbed the hills to see it.
128|=127
129|In some places they watched it dance through the holes of a sieve. A couplet says: Saint John's dawn, the loveliest dawn, the sun dances when it is born and laughs when the day dies.
130|Then they put bunches of herbs and flowers on the doors and windows, so that the witches would not come in.
131|They also put up thistles or bulrushes: they believed that the flowers protected by their scent, the thistles by their thorns and the bulrushes by their leaves, which look like swords.
132|The bunches were dried and hung somewhere in the house, to protect it for the rest of the year. A proverb says: on Saint John's day, the witches will flee.
133|We leave the bonfires behind, and now we are going to meet a friar who wrote against the fables of witchcraft.
134|Benito Xerónimo Feijoo was born in Casdemiro, in O Pereiro de Aguiar, in sixteen seventy-six. The eldest son of a noble family, he gave up his inheritance to become a Benedictine friar, shortly before turning fourteen.
135|=134
136|Later he was ordained a priest at the monastery of Samos, and he lived for many years in Oviedo, where he was a university professor.
137|He wrote the Universal Critical Theatre, and because he wrote against false beliefs and superstitions they called him the disabuser of the Spains. In a discourse on magic, Feijoo wrote that there were sorcerers, but not as many as the common people believed.
138|He warned that the fables of witchcraft pass from the people to the books, and from the books back to the people. And that in this way a fable born in the corner of a village comes to fill the whole world.
139|That is why he asked people to read with great distrust the books that spoke of witchcraft. Feijoo looked for the reasons why there were so many fables of witchcraft.
140|One was people's taste for telling and writing about prodigious things. Another, that people often attributed to the devil what was natural or the fruit of work.
141|He told the case of a Roman farmer accused of sorcery because his field yielded more than his neighbours' fields. The farmer defended himself by showing that he worked more and better than they did.
142|And another cause was malevolence, spite against the accused people. Feijoo laughed at a story in which some witches who flew faster than eagles could not catch up with a donkey.
143|He also told that he had known an old woman who was reputed to be a sorceress because she herself wanted that reputation. That way, he said, nobody refused her alms or a piece of bread.
144|He recorded that many authors believed the witches' flight was a dream, that the ointment only put them into a deep sleep and that they dreamed they were flying. And Feijoo admitted that the witches' flight was often only dreamed, but he did not deny that witches existed.
145|He thought that saying everything was illusion was falling into the other extreme. He also argued that women had the same capacity for understanding as men, and that Galician was not a dialect of Spanish.
146|In the eighteenth century, Friar Martín Sarmiento defended the knowledge of the healers, the witches, as that of true doctors and botanists. Feijoo always had delicate health, with frequent colds, and even so he lived to an old age.
147|He dedicated the third volume of the Critical Theatre to the abbot and the convent of Samos. In the great cloister of the monastery of Samos there is a statue of Feijoo, by Asorey.
148|Let's go back to the kitchen with the hearth, which is now in half-darkness. After supper, in the darkness of the night, the queimada is prepared.
149|Into the clay pot go the grape spirits with the sugar, the lemon peel and a few coffee beans. The diners gather around the pot, with the lights out, to cheer their hearts and tighten the bonds of friendship.
150|It is set alight and stirred slowly, letting the flames of the alcohol rise, which fall in cascades. One of them lifts the burning liquid with a ladle and lets it fall little by little into the pot, while reciting the spell.
151|And so it burns for a good while, until almost all the alcohol is used up. Then it is served hot, with all its ingredients, and according to tradition it drives away evil spirits and witches.
152|And someone remembers that well-known saying: I don't believe in witches, but they exist, they do. And if you ever hear the spell at a queimada, now you know it was born on a boat, among friends.
153|Now it is raining on the slates of the roof, grey and black. It is a fine, gentle rain, like dew. In the hearth the embers remain, warm and calm, and the settle is already empty.
154|In the pot, the queimada no longer burns, because almost all the alcohol is used up. The smoke rises slowly up the chimney, and the pot still hangs from the pot-hanger.
155|On the wall, the cupboards keep the bread for tomorrow, and the oven still holds a little warmth. In the byre, next to the kitchen, the cattle sleep warm. Outside, in the hórreo, the maize rests, and the pumpkins wait on the rat-stones.
156|Somewhere in the house hang last summer's dried herbs, and they still smell of fennel and rosemary. Tonight we heard a midwife, some words about seven springs and a list written beside a fountain.
157|Now nobody keeps watch or writes down names: the night belongs to everyone, and the rain falls the same on all the houses. Far away, the seven springs keep flowing in the darkness, and the water runs gently down to the river.
158|Over the meadows, the dew settles on the grass, drop by drop. The rain also falls on the hórreo, on the slates and the tiles, and slides slowly down its stone feet.
159|The fire can no longer be heard: only the rain on the roof, always the same, always gentle. Tomorrow, at dawn, the grass of the meadow will be wet with dew. The rain keeps falling, slowly, just as it fell on those villages four hundred years ago.
160|=159
161|The house rests under the rain, and now you don't have to remember anything. And now, slowly, you can put out the candle. Good night.
162|=161
